---
published: false
---
## Structured Authroing with XML

### Introduction
#### Structured Authoring
In her book, **Content Everywhere: Strategy and Structure for Future-ready Content**, Sara Wachter-Boettcher describes the process of developing a content strategy for creating future-proofed content through structured authoring. Wachter-Boettcher provides the following explanation of structured authoring:
 > “Today, most digital content is unstructured: just words poured onto a page. To signify, where one part ends and another begins, writers use formatting, like upping a font size to be a headline or putting the author’s name in italics. This works fine if you content is going to be used on a single page and viewed on a desktop monitor, but that’s about it.”
>“Structured content, on the other hand, is created in smaller modules, which can be stored and used in lots of ways. For example, you could display a headline and copy teaser in one place, and have a user click to read the rest – something you can’t do if the story is all one blob. You can give the same content different presentation rules when it’s displayed on mobile such as resizing headlines or changing which content is prioritized or emphasized – automatically. In this way, adding structure actually makes content more flexible, because it allows you to do more with it”

### XML
Wachter-Boettcher also provides an excellent explanation of XML: 
>“The mother of many markup approaches, XML (Extensible Markup Language) is designed to structure, store, and transport information using a set of rules to markup text with metadata.” “XML allows you to define your own tags, so you are not limited to a preset list of entities.”

See also this video from Clever Techie for an [overview of XML's use and structure] (https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KeLiQXqVgMI).

Developing XML Documentation
1. Identify your clients’ needs - look for content that is repeated.
2. Break down and organize your content
a.  Assess your content; determine what types of information are repeated, how the relationships between the different information types exist, and how they all fit together.
b.     Draw out these relationships in a tree, visually showing their relationships.

3. Define your Tags
a. In the example of the course catalogue, my client and I developed a scheme to describe each course within the catalogue. The root element for the XML document is “catalogue,” referring to the course catalogue. The main element is “course,” referring to each course that is described in the catalogue. Each course is described with the following sub-elements: 
“title” referring to the course title; 
 “id” referring to the course id number; 
 “format” referring to the format of instruction- this tag has two attributes: online or on campus;  
“instructor” referring to the individual teaching the course;  
 “description” referring to the blurb that overviews the course’s goals; 
 “start” referring to the start date of the course; 
 “end” referring to the end date of the course; 
 “tuition” referring to the cost of the course.
4.  Develop your Document Type Definition (DTD)
After you have determined what kinds of information that you want to capture in your XML document, you will define those information types in the Document Type Definition (DTD). The DTD is a set of rules that your XML document follows, and is used to ensure that valid types of information are included in the XML document. It dictates what can be included, and what cannot.
The DTD for the course catalogue looks as follows:
<!ELEMENT catalogue (course+)>
<!ELEMENT course (title, id, format, description, instructor, start, end, tuition)>
<!ATTLIST course subject (marketing|accounting|communication|programming|web_design|computer_basics|Microsoft|language ) #REQUIRED>
<!ELEMENT title (#PCDATA)>
<!ELEMENT id (#PCDATA)>
<!ELEMENT format (#PCDATA)>
<!ELEMENT description (#PCDATA)>
<!ELEMENT instructor (#PCDATA)>
<!ELEMENT start (#PCDATA)>
<!ELEMENT end (#PCDATA)>
<!ELEMENT tuition (#PCDATA)>
5.  Write your content with XML tags
a.       Connect XML file to DTD (Screen shot example)
b.      Use tree diagram to help structure your code
c.       Use the tags from your DTD to give semantic meaning to your content
d. I made sure to maintain consistent structuring for each course entry. This was essential to make the document usable. Each course entry in my XML is structured as such:
<course subject="">
    <title></title>
    <id></id>
    <format></format>
    <description></description>
    <instructor></instructor>
    <start></start>
    <end></end>
    <tuition></tuition>
  </course>
Each course entry presents the same information, and is structured in exactly the same manner.

(Example of entire xml document)
Essential XML Resources
https://www.recordsapi.com/outputexamples.html - Examples of XML outputs, demonstrating the potentialities of content marked up with XML.
https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/XSLTProcessor/Basic_Example - An Example of XML code with the output.
https://www.w3schools.com/XML/default.asp - w3schools XML tutorial
https://www.w3schools.com/XML/xml_validator.asp - XML validator to check that your code is functional.

