---
published: false
---
## Darwin Information Typing Architecture

### Technical Communication
To meet the diverse needs of our users, technical writers use tools that allow for publishing in a wide variety of outputs.  We accomplish this by writing our content in markup languages such as DITA XML.  

Markup languages separate content from formatting, freeing it up to be published on a variety of mediums. For example, a manual that you write can be published as a PDF document for print, as HTML to be pushed onto your website, and help documentation formats to be integrated into help systems. 

DITA is a powerful tool to create standardization and structure in content creation that allows for both is ease of sharing and collaboration, as well as a bridge between information silos with the separation of content from form.  

### DITA 
DITA is an open standard for modeling XML – a markup language commonly used in Technical Writing and across the internet – originally created by IBM. DITA is hugely beneficial to authors and content creators who are dealing with a vast amount of documentation on a regular basis. DITA gives authors a set of tags to give deeper meaning to the words that they use, and unlocks those words from the page where they are written. Major benefits of DITA include:
- Enables content reuse
- Enables output in multiple formats (not just PDF)
- Ensures consistent writing and formatting across authors
- Ease of localization  

It is essential to separate content and design to establish intelligent content that can adapt to different technologies and mediums.

### Creating a DITA project in Oxygen XML
In the following tutorial, I run through how to create a project in Oxygen, create new DITA topics, create a DITA map, add topics to that map, and generate PDF and HTML outputs from the DITA map.  

Oxygen has a robust resource library on their website. I highly recommend referring to their website for your questions as you get familiar with the tool. I recommend starting with their [Getting Started with DITA instructions](https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/versions/21.1/ug-editor/topics/eppo-first-dita-topic.html), which inspired the instructions below. 

#### Create a new DITA Project
1. Create a new folder on your desktop to store your project folders
2. In Oxygen, Project > New Project
3. Select the folder on your desktop, name your project
4. Select Save

#### Create DITA Topics
1. **File > New**
2. **Framework Template > DITA > topic > Concept/Reference/Task**
3. Name your new file
4. Select the project folder
5. Select **Create**. The topic will open up in the middle panel in Oxygen. For this tutorial, I have created a Concept topic. 
6. Begin entering your topic content. When you hit enter, you will need to select a new DITA element. Oxygen constrains your choices only to elements that are allowed based on DITA rules. 
7. Use the **Outline** window on the left to see the order and relationships in your content. You can rearrange the hierarchy of your content in this window, as well as add content to sibling locations following a child by selecting the parent element > right click > **Insert Before/Insert After > YOURELEMENT**  
**NOTE:** See the [Oxygen Element Quick Reference](https://www.oxygenxml.com/dita/1.3/specs/langRef/quick-reference/all-elements-a-to-z.html) for information on all of the DITA elements available through Oxygen. https://www.oxygenxml.com/dita/styleguide/webhelp-feedback/#Artefact/Authoring_Concepts/c_Introduction_to_DITA.html
8. Repeat steps 1 through 7 to create new topics. Each kind of topic has a different purpose and requirements: 
- Reference: "Reference topics describe regular features of a subject or product, such as commands in a programming language."
- Concept: "DITA concept topics answer "What is..." questions. They include a body-level element with a basic topic structure, including sections and examples."
- Task: "Task topics answer "How do I?" questions, and have a well-defined structure that describes how to complete a procedure to accomplish a specific goal." [oasis](https://docs.oasis-open.org/dita/v1.0/archspec/topicover.html)

#### Create a Map
1. **File > New**
2. **Framework templates > DITA maps > bookmap**
3. Add existing topics to your DITA Map
	a. Select the ditamap in the **DITA Maps Manager** window in the bottom left. 
    b. Right click > **Append Child > Reference** OR Right click > **Insert Before > Reference** OR Right click > **Insert After > Reference**
    c. Navigate to your topic, and select **Insert and Close**
    **NOTE:** Be sure your topics are in the same folder as your DITA map so the DITA open tool kit
    will be able to locate the files referenced in your map when you transform the map to create an
    output. 
4. Add new topics to your DITA Map
	a. Select the ditamap in the DITA Maps Manager window in the bottom left.
    b. Right click > **Append Child > New** OR Right click > **Insert Before > New** OR Right click > **Insert After > New**
    c. Select **Create**. The topic will open up in the middle panel in Oxygen. For this tutorial, I  created a Concept topic.
5. Create a submap
6. Create and populate topics buy tagging your content with the appropriate elements and attributes. See the [Oxygen Element Quick Reference](https://www.oxygenxml.com/dita/1.3/specs/langRef/quick-reference/all-elements-a-to-z.html) for information on all of the DITA elements available through Oxygen. 
7. Populate and organize your map using the **DITA Maps Manager** window. You can reorder your topics, create parent-child relationships between your topics

#### Export
1. Select your ditamap in the DITA Maps Manager window. 
2. Select Configure Transform Scenario(s).The Configure Transform Scenario(s) window will appear.
3. Select your transformation scenarios/the outputs you would like to create. For this tutorial, I selected DITA map PDF - based on HTML5 & CSS, and DITA Map HTML5
Select Apply Associated (2). The outputs will generate and popup on your computer.   
**NOTE:** The number following Apply Associated indicates the number of transform scenarios you are running on the ditamap.

#### Troubleshooting  
Sometimes, even when everything is correct and passes the validations, Oxygen throws errors. References outside the main DITA map folder is a common error in generation. This means that the DITA open toolkit thinks your referenced topics are not with your ditamap. See these [troubleshooting](https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/versions/21.0/ug-editor/topics/dita-ot-external-refs.html) options from Oxygen. I have found them to be very useful. 
